- Submit by blackboard :: Saturday March 4, 8 AM

Learning Objectives
===================

    1.  Consciously & critically examine sites from a UI designer's perspective.

    2.  Collaborate with another person.

    3.  Give an oral presentation.



Evaluation Criteria
===================

    1.  Written assignment: Quality of writing, addressing every point

    2.  Oral Presentation: Preparation, organization, expression, content.


Evaluation Criteria :: General Criteria for all sites
=====================================================

    1.  Characterize the purpose of the website; what assumptions the devs
        would be justified in making about its users.

        The purpose of the MIT website is to provide information about the university, 
        and market it to new students. The designers can safely assume that 

        1.  Users are interested in math and science
        2.  Users will have some level of technical understanding
        3.  The information has greater value than its presentation. i.e. The focus
            should be on accurate and useful information more than beautiful displays
        

        

    Organization / Navigation
    -------------------------

        2.  Is the organization simple to understand? Hierarchical organization?
            Links clearly labeled with informative text?

        Initially the system is straightforward but it very quickly breaks down as while
        the organization is hierarchical once you descend down into some sub portion of
        the site, there is often no good way to get back to the home page, or even some
        intermediary parent page. Some of the links are clearly labeled, but others are 
        nothing more than a hyperlinked number.

        The home page is a portal from where you can get to wherever you need to go, and
        From there the site becomes inconsistent. This is jarring at times, and it makes
        navigating from one sublevel of the hierarchy to another without going back to the
        parent level nearly, if not entirely, impossible.        


        3.  Is navigation easy? Could you find specific information quickly?

        Navigation down the hierarchy of pages is reasonably straightforward. Information 
        was easy to find, but once the information has been found navigating back to where 
        you came from is rather difficult. Even though the site generally clear on where to
        go to find information, searching for something specific would, in almost all cases,
        yield the desired result much more quickly. A search will give the desired input in 
        one step, whereas navigation will take several steps in nearly all cases.


        4.  Does it provide appropriate feedback to operations?

        No it does not. There is no clear way to see where you have come from, or your current
        position within the site's hierarchy beyond looking at the URL in your web browser. Thus
        clicking on a link, while the animation of a hyperlink is still perfectly valid, does not
        give any persistent information as to where you've come from once the new page has loaded.

        5.  Does the user have to remember information from an earlier page that is
            no longer displayed? Re-enter form data?

        Since this site is more informative than interactive, and those parts which are interactive
        are inaccessable to us, this question is unapplicable.


        6.  Local search engine? Does it respond clearly?

        This site has a very well thought out search engine which is local to the user's current 
        position within the site's hierarchy. Thus at the home page of the site the search engine
        works across the entire MIT website, and at every department's main page the search is
        across the department's pages. The responses of the search engine are both clear and 
        reasonably ordered.

        7.  Did you get lost/have a difficult time getting back to earlier page
            w/out browser?

        Unfortunately, the designers of the MIT website left out any form of position tracking within
        the site's hierarchy, so getting lost is nearly effortless. The only solution for getting back
        to earlier pages, which is generally implemented but not always, is to go back to the root by
        locating, and clicking on, the MIT logo, which then takes you back to the home page where you
        can navigate back to wherever you wish to go. This oversight makes the website much more 
        difficult to navigate in, and is one of the major downsides to its design.

        8.  Did all pages have a link back to the entry/home page?

        Yes. In most cases the MIT logo appears somewhere in the page's header, and clicking on that 
        will bring you back to the homepage. On those pages where the logo does not exist, as well as
        on all other pages, there is a small footer at the very bottom of the page with the MIT logo
        which will also bring you back to the home page.

        9.  Did the pages have a consistent appearance?

        No. The main page was styled like a portal with the information displayed in such a way as to
        only use up one screen's worth of space. Each child page was formatted slightly differently. 
        Departments each have their own unique theme which the majority of their pages hold to, and 
        individual faculty often have a personalized page with another different style. 

        The constant changes in page styling, combined with the total lack of a consisten header and 
        menu, were quite jarring. As one navigated through the site it would be easy to initially 
        come to the incorrect conclusion that they had been redirected away from MIT's site entirely.

        10. Did you encounter broken links or bad pages?
            Try http://validator.w3.org/checklink

        In the entirety of the site, there were seven bad links or pages according to the tool at 
        \url{http://validator.w3.org/checklink}. See 
        \url{http://validator.w3.org/checklink?uri=mit.edu&hide_type=all&depth=&check=Check#results1}
        for the results for MIT's site. Thus the site has successfully eliminated nearly all of its
        human error problems as far as navigation is concerned.


        11. How difficult was it to accomplish the presumed task of your visit?
            Are there things the site might have done to make it easier?

        Given that the purpose of visiting the site was to learn what was to be learned about the 
        opportunities for graduate study in computer science at MIT, the task was rather difficult.
        
        Learning about the opportunities for graduate and doctoral study ranged in difficulty from 
        determining the various areas of study within computer science one could specialize in 
        for a graduate or doctoral degree, which was reasonably challenging but doable with a 
        nontrivial amount of effort, to determining how much it would cost to get either a master's 
        or doctoral degree, which was not possible within the several hours spent navigating through 
        the site assuming one limited oneself to only using the MIT website, and its searching 
        functionalities, and not emailing faculty or staff.

        The difficulty of finding this information, which would be useful to many individuals, was 
        quite dissappointing. This information should have been accessible with minimal effort, and 
        despite the overal good design of the site's hierarchy it was not.

        The designers of the MIT site, specifically the site designed for the Computer Science Department,
        should have required a more readable and accessible envronment to display information. A better
        thought out menu would have been enormously helpful, and having clearly differentiated pages with
        relavent information on them would also have helped. More focus on the information needed by new 
        prospective students rather than the individual members of the department, be they students or 
        faculty, would have made the process of learning about MIT and what it has to offer much more 
        straightforward.
        

    Content and Presentation of Content
    -----------------------------------

        12. Was text content well-written, accessible, easily understood?

        The text of the MIT website was well written and generally accessible. Understandability was
        fine, however it was sometimes difficult to sift through all of the information provided to 
        find what was essential to the key questions of cost and degree requirements.


        13. Were fonts large enough, readable? Was text/background coloring good?

        The fonts chosen by the MIT website were on the whole far too small, they were quite
        challenging for me to read, and although I recognize that my visual impairment makes me less
        than objective on this, it certainly was a challenge for me to read the content of the site.

        The background coloring was usually fine, on some of the pages the contrast was done in an
        odd way that was less than useful, but these were far down the hierarchy on pages devoted to
        small departments or individuals and thus do not reflect the site as a whole.


        14. Were error messages or progress reports clear and understandable?

        Very few to no error messages were presented, and those that were seemed reasonable enough.
        Progress reports were entirely unused throughout the site as the site is dedicated to 
        information proliforation. Beyond that the places where a progress report would have been
        useful are inaccessible to the general populace as they would exist within the student or 
        faculty portals.
        

        15. Were images well chosen / support the text?

        Images were used somewhat sparingly, and mostly consisted of headshots of people who were 
        being highlighted for various reasons. Thus the images supported the text they were used
        with, but they were never used to help deliver the useful information which the site
        was attempting to provide.


        16. Do all images have text captions? Do they have tooltips? Choose (3)
            images to inspect the alt attribute of.

        All images that would reasonably have captions do have captions, background images do not but
        adding captions to them would make the site less usable so that is a perfectly reasonable 
        decision. Only one of the images I looked at with any level of detail had a tooltip, and 
        about half of the images had alt text. When the alt text was present it was generally quite
        useful, but it was not present several times when it would have been incredibly helpful to
        someone who was blind, had a slow internet connection, or was dealing with tight filtering.


        17. How was the graphic appearance of the site? dull/drab? busy/garish?

        The site is incredibly minimalistic. It borders on dull while maintaining just enough flair
        to seem interesting. This is obviously only considering the home portal. On average the 
        subordinate pages were much more interesting graphically with interactive menus, 
        three-dimensional backgrounds, and so on. There were some pages, the philosophy department's
        page in particular, which were entirely drab as they were nothing but plaintext HTML with no
        styling. 

        On the whole the site was somewhat dull, with interesting parts where it was likely many 
        people would be interacting, and incredibly plain parts where they were less likely to 
        frequent. This was highly dissappointing as MIT is considered one of the premiere 
        institutions of higher learning for technology and the sciences, but they cannot build an 
        attractive website.


        18. Was color used effectively?

        Color was very minimal, most of the pages on the MIT site are white with black text. There
        were colors on some pages, and when they were present they were tastefully presented. But 
        even with all the variance amoung the departments present on the site there were next to none
        which employed color beyond the very minimum needed to differentiate menus from the main 
        body of their pages.


        19. Did it have sound / video? Were they used effectively?

        Sound was not present on the site, and beyond a few video clips from interviews, or the 
        showcasing of experiments on some research pages there was no video either. The videos 
        present were perfectly acceptable, and more often than not interesting, but there were very 
        few of them.


        20. Did the site have advertising? Was the adv. intrusive or make it
            difficult to get to information on the site?

        Advertisement was thankfully absent from the site. Given that the site is an infromation hub
        for a very well-off private institution ads were wholly unnecessary.


        21. Was the site's privacy policy clearly and prominently accessible?
            Does the site record data about your visit?

        The site had no privacy policy per se, at least on the portions of the site accessible to the
        general public, and thus this does not apply. Data collection was either nonexistant, or so
        minimal as to escape detection even with repeated visits to the site.

        22. Anything else?

    Input features for non-shopping sites
    -------------------------------------

        23. For each input you try:

            a. Briefly characterize what the purpose of the input is.

            b. was the input mechanism easy to understand and use?

            c. Were select menus, check boxes, radio buttons used where
               appropriate in lieu of text boxes?

            d. Is there an opportunity for free entry of text that has some
               constraint on validity? If yes, try entering invalid data.
               Does it prevent entry? does it give useful feedback? does it
               explain what the needed pattern is?

            e. If the data is entered by checkboxes or select menus and there is
               a clearly inconsistent set of choices, try making it to see if the
               site catches the error. Does it prevent the choice? Does it give
               understandable feedback that the choice is invalid?

    Summary Questions for All Sites
    -------------------------------

        A. Identify any features of each that you thought were especially effective,
           or attractive or surprised you.

        B. Identify any features of each that you thought were particularly dismal
           or unfortunate design choices.

        C. Make a summary judgement on whether the sites are equally effective
           or one appears better than the other and defend your choice.
